On this episode of "expedition files"...
In 1975. union leader Jimmy hoffa
vanishes from a parking
lot without a trace.
Was it a mob hit? If
so. where's the body?
A new theory may finally solve
one of the FBI's
longest-running investigations.
Then. the holy grail.
the cup of Jesus Christ.
has been hunted by
kings and crusaders.
This biblical relic was said to be lost.
Has it now been found?
And groundbreaking engineer
Rudolf diesel disappears on
an ocean liner while
transporting secret plans that
could change the course of world war I.
We reveal what may have
been one of the greatest
espionage operations in history.
In the corridors of time...
Are mysteries that defy explanation.
Now. I'm traveling through history itself...
On a search for the truth.
New evidence.
Shocking answers.
I'm Josh gates.
And these...
Are my expedition files.
One of my first jobs out of
college was working as a waiter
at a Hollywood institution
called the magic castle.
a private club for magicians.
I learned two things working there.
One. magicians are lousy tippers.
And two. there's nothing
an audience loves more than
watching something disappear.
So tonight. prepare to be amazed
as we take vanishing acts to
their most shocking extreme.
I promise. no top hats.
rabbits. or $1 tips in sight.
We examine three of history's most
extraordinary disappearances...
people and things that were
suddenly gone without a trace.
leaving the rest of the world guessing.
That is. until now.
We begin on July 30. 1975.
It's a muggy afternoon
just after 2:30 P.M.
I'm standing outside the
machus red fox restaurant.
about 20 miles northwest of Detroit.
The guy on the payphone here?
He isn't just your average angry diner.
In fact. he's one of the most
powerful men in america.
This is Jimmy hoffa.
At 62. hoffa is the former
president of the teamsters.
the most formidable
labor union in america.
Right now. he's on the
phone with his wife. Josephine.
upset that he's been stood
up for a crucial meeting.
He tells her to throw
some steaks on the grill
and expect him back by 4 o'clock.
But those steaks. well.
they're gonna go cold.
And Jimmy hoffa isn't coming
home for dinner. because just
minutes from now. he'll disappear.
setting off one of the most extraordinary
missing persons cases in history.
For over 50 years. the world will ask
the same question... what
really happened to Jimmy hoffa?
And why has his body
never been found?
In the middle of the last
century. pretty much everyone
knows the name. Jimmy
hoffa. To millions. he's a hero.
As teamster president.
he stands up against
big business to secure
better wages and benefits for
the blue-collar workers who depend on it.
You've heard of the supply chain?
The vast network that moves
goods from factories to stores.
Well. in the 20th century.
the teamsters control it.
The organization of truck
drivers and warehouse workers
literally keeps the
American economy moving.
Hoffa rises through the ranks
as a street-fighting labor organizer.
He becomes union president in 1957.
His influence is undeniable.
but his methods are often
controversial. even illegal.
You see. in the '50s.
organized crime has its hooks
in a lot of local unions.
In return for their loyalty
and occasional muscle.
hoffa lets mob-connected
businessmen borrow massive
chunks of money from
the teamsters pension fund.
That money helps build glitzy
Vegas hotels and casinos.
The mob gets low-interest
loans. and in exchange.
they give union jobs to
teamsters. everyone from
bellhops to cabbies.
Workers adore hoffa. The government?
Not so much. especially
Attorney General
Robert f. Kennedy.
See. it's not just hoffa's
mob buddies who are
breaking the law.
Hoffa plays dirty himself... extortion.
wiretapping. embezzlement.
In 1967. after years of
attempts. the feds. led by
Kennedy. finally nailed
Jimmy for jury tampering
and misusing union pension funds.
He gets 13 years behind bars.
With his raincoat covering handcuffs.
hoffa arrives at federal prison
in lewisburg. Pennsylvania.
It seems the street-fighting labor
boss has finally met his match.
But don't count hoffa out just yet.
He's about to get help
from a very unlikely friend.
president Richard Nixon.
On December 23.
1971. Nixon commutes
hoffa's sentence. and
Jimmy gets out after serving
less than five years.
Nixon thinks that freeing
him will earn him support from
hoffa's loyal followers.
But for hoffa. freedom
comes with a caveat.
Nixon bars him from any
union activity until 1980.
effectively minimizing
his power and influence.
In 1974. hoffa sues the
government to lift the ban.
With an appeal underway.
hoffa tries to shore up support
for a run at the union presidency
at the next election...
which brings us back to
the restaurant parking lot
on that muggy day in July of 1975.
When hoffa fails to
arrive home. his family
calls the police.
The next morning.
investigators find hoffa's car
in the machus red fox parking lot.
There's no sign of a
struggle and no sign of Jimmy.
Several people report seeing
the famous labor leader at
the restaurant the day before.
One witness claims she saw hoffa
get into a maroon Mercury
sedan with three other men.
It is the last time anyone
will report seeing hoffa alive.
A nationwide manhunt is launched.
As it heats up. rumors
circulate that the mafia
is involved in hoffa's disappearance.
Hoffa's family finds his date
book. and it makes the mob
the prime suspect.
It reveals the names of two
men he intended to meet that day
at the restaurant.
Tony giacalone. aka
Tony Jack. a senior figure in
the Detroit mob.
And Tony provenzano. aka
Tony pro. a "capo" or captain
for the genovese crime family.
Investigators track down both Tonys.
Each has a strong alibi
and deny that a meeting with
hoffa was even scheduled.
But there is a thread for
the investigators to pull on.
Tony giacalone's son happens
to own a Mercury sedan.
just like the one the
eyewitness described.
And there's another interesting wrinkle.
A man called Chucky o'brien
borrowed the car that morning
to supposedly run some errands.
Chucky was a known
hoffa union associate.
Jimmy treated him like a stepson.
When authorities process
the car. they find bloodstains
on the seat. and that's not all.
A few strands of hair
matching hoffa's color
also go into evidence bags.
Police dogs hit on hoffa's
scent. suggesting Jimmy was in
the back seat and. even
more disturbingly. the trunk.
But o'brien claims he
didn't pick Jimmy up
at the machus red fox that day.
And the blood on the seat?
Chucky says that comes
from a salmon he delivered to
a teamster's house that morning.
If this all sounds very fishy
to you. you're not alone.
However. tests on the
blood reveal o'brien is telling
the truth. at least about the salmon.
It's fish blood. not human.
As to the hair. well. it's the mid-'70s.
and we're more than a decade
away from DNA technology that
could confirm whether
it belonged to hoffa.
Days turn to weeks.
and there's still no sign of Jimmy.
In November of 1975.
nearly four months
after the disappearance.
investigators catch a break.
Ralph picardo. a
mob-connected convict serving
time for murder. claims
he knows the truth of
hoffa's disappearance and
gives up the details to the feds in
exchange for a reduced sentence.
Ralph points the finger at
the two Tonys. saying they sent
four wise guys to kidnap
hoffa from the machus red fox.
and that they took him
to a second location
where he was shot and killed.
Then. according to picardo.
the body was packed into
a 55-gallon drum. loaded on a truck.
and driven to a mob-controlled
landfill in New Jersey.
where it was buried.
However. several days of
searching at the dump turns up
little more than toxic waste
and animal bones. likely
discarded from nearby
meat processing plants.
In late 1975. a grand jury
grills Tony pro. Tony Jack.
and several of the other
alleged mob co-conspirators.
But nobody talks. They all plead the fifth.
With scant evidence and no body.
the case of the missing
union leader goes colder
than the Detroit river in February.
In 1982. authorities declare
Jimmy hoffa legally dead.
despite never in any way
answering what happened to him.
The world is left mystified
as to his final fate.
But then. 19 years later. a
game-changing revelation will
crack the case wide open.
In 2001. 19 years after
Jimmy hoffa went missing.
a shocking discovery
jolts the case back into
the national spotlight.
DNA testing confirms the
hair found in the car is hoffa's.
There's no longer any doubt.
The infamous union boss
was inside that vehicle.
But where was he taken?
And what was done to him?
For over two decades. mafia historian.
Christian cipollini. has dug
into the blood-soaked theories
surrounding what happened
to hoffa and his body.
The hoffa case fascinates me
because this is something that
doesn't have closure.
It's like the jfk assassination.
It's like the disappearance
of Amelia earhart.
We want some answers.
One of the first major
theories that really stuck in
the American psyche came
to light when a former mobster
named Tony the Greek.
he said. hoffa was killed
and then transported to New Jersey.
and buried under the giants stadium.
which they were building at the time.
The problem with that
theory is that the mafia
likes to do things in a practical way.
Keep it simple.
What the mob probably didn't
do was pack the body of the most
famous missing man in america
on a truck. taking it across
state lines to Bury it in
such an extravagant way.
Rumors swelled into an urban
legend that Jimmy hoffa was
buried in the stadium's foundations.
But when it was demolished in 2010.
no trace of him was found.
Which leads us to popular
theory number two. the irishman.
In 2003. frank sheer an.
a former teamster official
and alleged mob
hitman. is dying of cancer.
On his deathbed. he
gives a jaw-dropping
confession to his lawyer.
He claims hoffa was abducted
and murdered by the mob.
Sheeran says he was not
only there that day. but he was
the one who actually pulled the trigger.
Sheeran's confession
becomes a best-selling book.
later adapted into
Martin scorsese's movie.
"the irishman." in which
he's played by Robert De Niro.
Sheeran gives the exact
address of a house in Detroit where
he claims hoffa was murdered.
In 2004. investigators
tear up the floorboards
and they do discover blood.
Unfortunately. it's not a match for hoffa.
The only evidence of frank
sheer an being involved in
the hoffa hit and disappearance
were his own claims.
And his own story changed
many times over the years.
The irishman theory is
great pop culture americana.
but it doesn't rest on solid evidence.
So what really happened to hoffa's body?
Why hasn't it been found?
Over the years. dozens of
theories have been put forward.
mostly by former wise guys
looking for 15 minutes of fame
and a quick buck.
One claims hoffa was dumped
in the Florida everglades.
Another swears he was
dropped out of an airplane into
the Great Lakes.
Yet another says he buried
hoffa beneath a swimming pool.
It's estimated the FBI
has spent tens of millions of
dollars chasing bogus leads.
In 2022. they even reinvestigated
the dump in New Jersey.
But once again. they
came up empty-handed.
50 years of searching for
the body of Jimmy hoffa.
What they did right
in this hit. we assume.
is they destroyed the body.
So if it is the mob.
how did they make hoffa
disappear permanently?
In 2025. it's revealed that the FBI caught
a major break when Detroit
mobster Anthony palazzolo.
a.k.a. Tony pal. confesses to
the hit. saying he turned hoffa
into literal mincemeat
at his place of business.
the Detroit sausage company.
Supposedly. the remains are
then cremated at a mob-owned
dump called central sanitation.
And Christian believes the evidence
was then further erased.
From machus red fox to
the central sanitation is just
a short drive.
This entire crime could
have been carried out in less
than an hour.
A year or so later.
central sanitation burned to
the ground. and you wouldn't
be able to find any evidence
even if it was there.
The key to pulling off this perfect crime...
Was leave no body.
Run through a sausage
grinder and cremated
not once. but twice.
Tony pal's confession
suggests a logical and grisly
conclusion to the hoffa mystery.
Jimmy hoffa was a titan
of his age. but in death.
his remains will never be found
because there's nothing to find.
Hoffa's final resting place
has gone up in smoke. literally.
From a missing man who helped
shape a century to a missing
object that shaped the last two millennia.
It's the year 33 ad.
just outside the city walls of Jerusalem.
This group of men here.
they're guests at history's
most famous dinner party.
That one there is Peter.
And over in the shadows.
brooding and restless. Judas.
And then there's our
host. Jesus of nazareth.
According to Christian
scripture. by this time
tomorrow. Jesus will be
executed on a Roman cross.
And the simple cup
he now lifts is about to
become christendom's most
sacred and most controversial
relic. the holy grail.
Many will come to believe
the grail grants divine power
or even eternal life.
but soon it will vanish.
Will it be lost forever
or will it end up hiding
in plain sight?
The story of the grail is one of mystery.
The Bible doesn't even provide
a physical description of it.
The gospels of Matthew.
Mark. and Luke. written more
than a half a century after Jesus' death.
refer simply to a cup.
The cup is used ceremonially
to represent Christ's sacrifice.
The scripture also has nothing
to say about where this cup
went after the fateful supper.
nor any of the subsequent
claims of its qualities.
For centuries. it seems
to have simply vanished.
Then. in the middle ages.
tales emerge of the grail as
an artifact imbued with incredible power.
Mostly set in the mystical
realm of king Arthur. these are
stories of heroic knights
and sacred mysteries.
Think of them as the "star wars" saga.
only set a long time ago
in a castle far. far away.
But here's where things
get really interesting.
because at the same time that
we get these medieval myths
about the chivalrous knights
of the round table. there's also
a real-life group of god's
warriors. the knights templar.
an order of military monks.
equal parts holy and badass.
They roam the Christian
world with one foot in the church
and the other on the battlefield.
After the first crusade.
they're charged with protecting
wealthy Christian pilgrims
on their travels to the holy land.
The templars' home base
is in the heart of Jerusalem.
and it's said to contain
vast wealth and holy relics.
Rumors begin to spread.
Did they discover
Jesus' chalice and keep it
for themselves? If so.
where did they put it?
The holy grail could be anywhere
across the vast templar network.
stretching from England to Syria.
But in 1312. the templars
are forcibly disbanded.
without ever revealing if
they did indeed get the grail.
In the centuries that follow.
the legend and lore of.
Christ's cup only grows.
with many vessels
emerging that people claim
are the real deal.
There's the silver antioch
chalice. found in the ruins of
a church in Turkey.
The onyx chalice of dona urraca.
housed in a basilica in Spain.
And who could forget the nanteos cup.
a humble wooden bowl
from a monastery in wales.
At least that one looks
like the cup of a carpenter.
In fact. over 200 vessels
across Europe have. at one time
or another. been presented
as the possible holy grail.
Most of them. well. let's
just say they don't hold water.
But a couple seem real enough
to cause even skeptical grail seekers
to take a second look.
Behold the sacro catino.
a.k.a. The genoa chalice.
Sure. it looks like a satellite
dish from the emerald city.
but according to the medieval
chronicle of the Italian city
of genoa. crusaders seized this
mysterious green vessel during
the capture of the
biblical city of caesarea in
the year 1101.
Now. according to the
chronicle. the chalice is
said to be crafted out of
pure emerald and is with
the last supper. fueling the
belief that it could possess
extraordinary powers.
The cup even appears to
glow from within. radiating what
some have said is a divine light.
But can the genoa
chalice be proven to be
the true holy grail?
In the middle ages. the
emerald genoa chalice is
considered by many to be the holy grail.
In the 1800s. when
Napoleon annexes genoa.
the French emperor personally
demands that the prized chalice
is shipped to the Paris
academy of sciences to
verify its authenticity.
But while in transit
from genoa to France.
the cup fractures.
Upon examination.
parisian scientists determined
the dish is not an emerald
at all. but byzantine glass.
That's a big problem because
this particular style of glass
was not in use until hundreds
of years after Jesus' death.
And so it becomes
another failed contender in
the enduring quest for the holy grail.
And as it turns out.
Napoleon isn't the only
power-hungry authoritarian
to seek the grail.
A century later. Adolf Hitler
becomes fascinated with
the grail and its supposed powers.
His most lethal enforcer.
Heinrich himmler.
reportedly dispatches the Nazi ss
on expeditions across
Europe in search of the relic.
For more on this. please see.
"Indiana Jones and the last crusade."
And indy's adventure is just
one of many modern spins on
the grail legend.
If you look around. grail
mythology is everywhere
in pop culture. from Dan
brown's "Da Vinci code"...
To "monty python" to gaming's
"assassin's creed" franchise.
To the faithful. the holy grail remains
not a thing of fiction. but a divine relic
that could still be found.
Despite centuries of pursuit. though.
it has remained elusive.
But now. professor of history and folklore
Dr. Lynn mcneill claims there may be
compelling new evidence
for the grail's existence.
Within the context of
christianity. the grail is one
of the most sacred
objects on this planet today.
And we're left wondering
what happened.
If we still have it. if it
is findable. if it exists.
if it is extant in the world.
this would be magnificent.
Recent research is starting to show that
the chalice of valencia is
the historic cup of Christ.
This may be more than just a local belief.
This could actually be possible.
The holy chalice of valencia.
also known as the Santo
caliz. has been protected
in the cathedral of valencia.
Spain. for the last 600 years.
Although details are spotty.
it is believed the chalice came
from the holy land to Rome
with Saint Peter in the 1st century ad.
Later. in the 3rd century.
Saint Lawrence brought the cup
to his native Spain.
where it has been
safeguarded for centuries.
Since arriving in valencia.
religious pilgrims have
traveled from all around
the world to glimpse what
they believe to be the one true cup.
But others are unconvinced.
After all. it's kind of hard
to imagine Jesus would use
something this ornate.
But in 1960. a Spanish archaeologist
discovers this chalice is
actually three separate pieces.
He claims the stand of the cup
comes from the medieval period.
while the base dates to the 9th century.
But here's the kicker.
The cup itself was crafted
between the 2nd century bc
and the 1st century ad.
and the agate stone it's made
from is only found in the holy land.
This cup really could date
from the time and place of Jesus.
The entire cup itself
is not what Jesus
would have drank out of.
Just that top part. that simple stone cup.
That would be the grail.
The rest of it would be casing
placed around it. and this is
a common practice of
putting sacred objects in
an intentionally ornate container to show
their importance through
the way we display them.
Another interesting element
is the idea that this cup
would have needed to meet
certain ritual requirements.
A lot of people forget that
the last supper wasn't just
any meal... it was a seder.
It was a passover meal.
Any cup used in the
passover meal needs to hold
a minimum amount of liquid.
And this particular cup is
just the right size to hold
the required two revits... is
the talmudic measurement
that's needed to be held with wine.
And this holds 2.5.
So to know that this holy
chalice. that it's dated to
the right time period.
that it is ritually correct for
a passover dinner...
for believers. these elements
really just become the final
proof that this is. not just
in our hearts. but in history.
the holy grail.
To many. this case is far from closed.
After all. the chalice has
many gaps in its history before
arriving in Spain.
Like many religious mysteries.
this ultimately comes down to
a question of faith.
The grail's significance lies
in what it represents to those
who seek it. whether that
means it's a physical cup or not.
I'll raise a glass to that.
Nearly 2.000 years
after the grail vanishes.
another disappearance sends
shock waves through history.
It's September 29. 1913.
I'm about to board
aboard the ss dresden.
a British passenger
liner sailing from Belgium
bound for England.
Checking in behind
me. a brilliant engineer
named Rudolf diesel.
The very name powers the
world. engine and fuel alike.
And in his suitcase are
revolutionary designs.
ideas that could challenge
empires. rattle industries.
and maybe even get a man killed.
And sure enough. by
dawn. diesel will disappear.
For over 100 years. historians will spin
their wheels asking what
really happened to him.
That is. until a new theory
fuels the search for answers.
In the late 19th century.
the world is racing
toward the future. but its
steam-powered engines
are stuck in the past.
burning through coal.
guzzling water. and
constantly breaking down.
Enter Rudolf diesel. a
German engineer with a mind
like a finely-tuned
machine... precise. relentless.
and absolutely obsessed with efficiency.
In 1897. he unveils his masterwork.
the engine that bears his name.
The diesel engine's
innovation? Compression ignition.
That means air inside the engine cylinder
gets squeezed really
hard until the pressure
makes it white-hot.
Then. fuel is injected and
spontaneously combusts.
creating a massive amount of power.
It's cheaper than steam. and best of all.
no more coal shoveling.
Diesel's prototype is
fueled with peanut oil.
Almost overnight.
diesel's engine becomes
an economic and industrial
game-changer around the world.
Soon. diesel achieves
incredible wealth and fame.
But success comes
with serious headaches.
Rivals want his secrets.
Powerful industries feel threatened.
The German government
wants greater control of
their favorite son.
And over the next decade.
diesel's fortune slips away.
lost to bad investments. legal battles.
and his own lavish lifestyle.
By 1913. Europe is at a crossroads.
The storm clouds of
world war I are gathering.
Desperate for cash to pay down
his debts. diesel makes a bold
and risky move. taking on
a business partner to open
a diesel engine plant in England.
That's where he's
headed on the ss dresden
to cut the ribbon on his
brand-new English factory.
But with pre-war tensions
rising between britain
and diesel's native Germany.
transferring cutting-edge
technology is a dangerous game.
The morning of September
30th. diesel's business partner
expects to meet him for breakfast.
When the famously
punctual diesel doesn't show.
his partner pays a visit to his cabin.
Inside. diesel's nightshirt
lays neatly atop the bed.
which hasn't been slept in.
His gold watch. luggage.
and his wallet are
in the room.
But neither diesel nor
the important documents
he's said to be traveling
with are anywhere to be found.
His diary is empty. save for
the sign of a cross penciled
next to yesterday's
date. September 29th.
the last time anyone saw Rudolf diesel.
Famous inventor Rudolf diesel
is on his way to England on
the ss dresden when
he mysteriously vanishes.
The crew scours the
decks for any sign of
the missing engineer.
At the stern of the ship.
a curious discovery...
diesel's hat and jacket
neatly folded near the railing.
The crew declares him a man overboard.
Almost immediately. news
of diesel's disappearance
makes international headlines.
And 11 days later. the story takes
a truly tragic turn.
Sailors aboard a Dutch
steamer find a body floating in
the north sea.
Given the state of decomposition.
they retrieve a few personal
effects before returning
the dead man to a watery grave.
Diesel's son later identifies a pillbox
and an eyeglasses case
as belonging to his father.
Diesel's family claims it
must have been an accident.
But the sea was calm that night.
and the dresden's railings were too high
for a simple misstep.
If diesel went overboard.
it wasn't by chance.
But could it have been by choice?
Perhaps diesel's dire financial situation
prompted him to commit suicide.
For a man who revolutionized
engines. his bank account was
running on fumes.
Before he set sail. he
gave his wife a sealed bag.
instructing her not to open it for a week.
After his presumed
death. she looks inside.
finding documents revealing
his deep debt and 20.000 marks.
worth about $120.000 today.
This final gesture would
seem to frame this as a suicide.
But is it?
Because here's the thing.
No one who knows diesel
believes he's capable of
self-harm... not his
friends. not his family.
not his colleagues.
Yes. he was in debt. but
he was also on the verge
of winning another fortune.
And for a man as meticulous as diesel.
there was no note. no will.
just that enigmatic cross
in his diary.
It all seems very out of character.
And then there's the missing
important documents diesel was
said to be traveling with.
which leads many to believe
that this isn't a suicide on the high seas.
but a maritime murder.
The approach of world war I
makes the diesel mystery even murkier.
At the time. submarines are
the hottest thing in warfare.
and diesel's engine could
superpower them. making them
cheaper. faster. with more range.
giving whoever has diesel's technology
a deadly advantage.
The kaiser wants that tech
locked down in Germany.
The government warns diesel.
"share it with foreign
powers. and it's treason."
But the engineer believes
his invention is for everyone.
not just one military.
And there's more.
Diesel's journey has a double agenda.
Publicly. he was set to
attend the ribbon-cutting
of his new factory. set to build engines
for agricultural machines
and cargo ships.
But behind the scenes. he was meeting
with British military officials.
discussing how his engines.
German-designed engines.
could power specialized
British warships. including submarines.
Some believe German
agents silenced diesel to keep
his plans out of enemy hands.
Possible. but as it turns out.
the kaiser isn't the only one
with the motive and
means to do diesel in.
His engine doesn't just
threaten military power.
it threatens big oil.
Unlike gasoline. diesel's engine runs on
peanut oil or coal-tar.
cheap fuels that don't require
massive oil empires.
Empires like that of
the world's richest man.
j.d. Rockefeller. who has a reputation
for protecting his riches
by any means necessary.
As intriguing as the
murder theory may be.
there is a glaring problem.
Not a shred of evidence has
surfaced in over a century to
prove diesel was assassinated
by the German government
or big oil... operations that
would surely have left witnesses
and some sort of paper trail.
So if he wasn't murdered
and he didn't commit suicide.
then what happened to Rudolf diesel?
Could it be that he didn't die at all?
While Jimmy hoffa vanished
without a trace. leaving only
rumors of his fate. other mob
hits unfolded in broad daylight.
designed to stun the public.
In 1957. Albert Anastasia.
once head of murder. inc..
was gunned down in a
New York barbershop...
a towel over his face
as bullets tore him apart.
In 1979. carmine galante was
murdered mid-meal in Brooklyn.
a cigar clenched between his teeth.
Then. in 1985. gambino
boss. Paul castellano.
was brazenly executed outside
sparks steakhouse in Manhattan.
ambushed in the street
as crowds looked on.
These assassinations
were more than power plays.
They were spectacles.
Unlike hoffa's vanishing
act. they left indelible.
gruesome evidence.
reminders that the mafia often
preferred its messages written in blood.
Rudolf diesel was one of
the greatest engineering minds
our world has ever known.
Now. a bold new theory
shakes up everything we thought
we knew about what happened to him.
Author and historian
Douglas brunt claims
that there's a shocking truth
behind diesel's disappearance.
something you'd never expect.
Rudolf diesel is the most
under appreciated inventor
of his time.
He had a very sort of liberal approach
to the sharing of information
around the technology.
And diesel abhorred the
nationalism and the more
aggressive foreign
policy of the Germans.
There was also evidence that
he had very high contact with
the British royal Navy.
which was at that time
run by Winston Churchill.
And so the most likely conclusion
of the diesel mystery.
looking at all the evidence.
is that he did not slip and fall overboard.
he did not commit suicide.
he was not murdered.
but with the assistance of
British naval intelligence. he staged
his own disappearance.
Brunt believes the British
government orchestrated one of
history's greatest cover-ups.
faking Rudolf diesel's death to
secretly harness his genius
while protecting him from
deadly German retribution.
My belief is that Rudolf
diesel got on the dresden...
And then got right back off.
And then the dresden left without him.
This is supported by the
steward's cabin list saying
he was not aboard
when the dresden set sail.
In the very first days after
diesel's disappearance.
the mysterious details of
his financial position start to
show up in the media to try to
get the suicide theory some traction.
They wanted to get it to
look like diesel was sad
and depressed and
suicidal and bankrupt.
It'd be very easy to plant
those kinds of stories
and get it printed.
Spinning a tale of diesel's
despair may have fueled
the suicide theory.
But what about the body found at sea?
The one bearing his belongings.
yet. strangely. never
recovered for autopsy?
It's possible there may
have been a corpse
as part of this deception.
Perhaps British intelligence
felt they needed to float
a corpse out there...
Some happenstance
steamer would come upon.
But then. strangely.
there are no interviews with
the fishermen on record.
There's no record of their names.
And they returned the corpse
to the water. which is not
the custom of the day.
Okay. so we've got
young Winston Churchill
and the British royal
Navy executing a plan
to drop a dead body into the ocean.
one that isn't diesel. to
mislead the German government.
Sounds a little out there.
but what if I told you that
Churchill pulled exactly
the same stunt 30 years later
during world war ii in
something known as
operation mincemeat?
Operation mincemeat was a world war ii
deception operation using a corpse.
They handcuffed a briefcase
with fake battle plans to
a corpse and floated it
into the coast of Spain
where they knew Nazi
agents would find it.
And Hitler took the bait.
He thought we were going
one way. we went the other.
Operation Rudolf diesel
could be a precursor to
operation mincemeat.
And then there's the bizarrely
exceptional performance of
the submarines of the
British Navy in the war.
And they're all diesel-powered.
So it seems like diesel might
actually have been alive in
the service of Churchill's
royal Navy building
submarine diesels in
Canada for the war effort.
There's an interesting
final twist to this theory.
In 1914. a newspaper ran a
story claiming Rudolf diesel
was alive and living in Canada.
Maybe the story was a hoax.
or maybe British intelligence
had it buried.
Coincidentally. around
that time. vickers shipyard in
Montreal suddenly became much
more successful at churning out
diesel engines for submarines.
Today. a century after his disappearance.
Rudolf diesel's engines
are still running all over
the world. proving. if
nothing else. his legacy is
alive and well.
I'm Josh gates. and I'll see
you on the next expedition.